docs/v0.0.1/validators/index.md, before:

# Validators

A validator is a function that assesses the validity of a property (meaning one validator per property). It can be sync/async but is expected to behave as below

```ts
import type { Summary } from 'ivo';

type Input = {}; // the input type of your model
type Output = {}; // the output type of your model

type FieldError = {
  reasons: string[];
  metadata?: Record<string, any> | null;
};

type ValidationResults =
  | boolean
  | {
      valid: true; // tells if data was valid or not
      validated?: Input[K]; // the validated values passed which could have been formated in the custom validator (i.e made ready for the db). "K" here represents the property being validated
    }
  | {
      metadata?: Record<string, any>; // an object that will contain extra info on why validation failed
      reason?:
        | string
        | string[]
        | {
            [K in keyof (Input & Aliases)]: FieldError; // dot notation here works if first key is a property, virtual or alias e.g: { "address.street": "too short", "address.zipCode": "invalid code" }
          };
      valid: false;
    };

function validator1(value: any, summary: Summary<Input, Output>) {
  // validation logic here

  if (valid) return { valid, validated };

  return { reason, valid };
}

function validator2(value: any, summary: Summary<Input, Output>) {
  // validation logic here

  if (valid) return false;

  return true;
}
```

In the code snippet above we have 2 validators; `validator1` and `validator2`

Although both work just the same, we `validator1` is recommended because:

- it is good to provided the reason why the validation failed and
- returning the `validated` value tells TypeScript more about the type of that property especially if have not explicitly provided the input & output interfaces of your schema

> N.B: if the validator does not return a validated value or it is undefined, the direct value passed will be used even `undefined`.

## Post validation

If you find the need to perform multiple validation steps on more than one field, you can achieve this with the `postValidate` option of your schema.

### PostValidationConfig:

```ts
type PostValidationConfig = {
  properties: keyof Input[];
  handler: (
    summary: Summary<Input, Output, CtxOptions>,
    propertiesProvided
  ) =>
    | void
    | ValidationResponseObject
    | Promise<void | ValidationResponseObject>;
};

// and the schema postValidate option's signature

type Options = {
  ...otherOptions;
  postValidate: PostValidationConfig | PostValidationConfig[];
};
```

As illustrated in the example above, the PostValidateConfig is an object that expects two properties:

- `properties` an array of at least two unique input properties on your schema
- `handler` a function (sync/async) that will determine the validity of the operation with respect to it's properties. This function is called immediately the initial validation is successful and at least one of the properties of it's config has been provided during updates but always gets called at creation

> **If the postValidate option is an array, every set of properties has to be unique for each config**

```ts
// ❌ this will result in a schema error
const schema = new Schema(definitions, {
  postValidate: [
    { properties: ['email', 'username'], handler },
    { properties: ['email', 'username'], handler }
  ]
});

// ❌ this will also result in a schema error
const schema = new Schema(definitions, {
  postValidate: [
    { properties: ['email', 'username'], handler },
    { properties: ['username', 'email'], handler }
  ]
});

// ✅ this works
const schema = new Schema(definitions, {
  postValidate: [
    { properties: ['email', 'username'], handler },
    { properties: ['role', 'username'], handler }
  ]
});
```

> N.B: **This option is not inherited during schema extension**

## Built-in validation helpers

Here are some built-in validators you could use study to build your own validators:

- [isArrayOk](./isArrayOk.md)
- [isBooleanOk](./isBooleanOk.md)
- [isCreditCardOk](./isCreditCardOk.md)
- [isEmailOk](./isEmailOk.md)
- [isNumberOk](./isNumberOk.md)
- [isStringOk](.isStringOk.md)

Commit message:

docs: update docs of behaviour of resolvers, sanitizers validators, constant, default and error setters when they throw errors instead of resolving a value

docs/v0.0.1/validators/index.md, after:

# Validators

A validator is a function that assesses the validity of a property (meaning one validator per property). It can be sync/async but is expected to behave as below

```ts
import type { Summary } from 'ivo';

type Input = {}; // the input type of your model
type Output = {}; // the output type of your model

type FieldError = {
  reasons: string[];
  metadata?: Record<string, any> | null;
};

type ValidationResults =
  | boolean
  | {
      valid: true; // tells if data was valid or not
      validated?: Input[K]; // the validated values passed which could have been formated in the custom validator (i.e made ready for the db). "K" here represents the property being validated
    }
  | {
      metadata?: Record<string, any>; // an object that will contain extra info on why validation failed
      reason?:
        | string
        | string[]
        | {
            [K in keyof (Input & Aliases)]: FieldError; // dot notation here works if first key is a property, virtual or alias e.g: { "address.street": "too short", "address.zipCode": "invalid code" }
          };
      valid: false;
    };

function validator1(value: any, summary: Summary<Input, Output>) {
  // validation logic here

  if (valid) return { valid, validated };

  return { reason, valid };
}

function validator2(value: any, summary: Summary<Input, Output>) {
  // validation logic here

  if (valid) return false;

  return true;
}
```

In the code snippet above we have 2 validators; `validator1` and `validator2`

Although both work just the same, we `validator1` is recommended because:

- it is good to provided the reason why the validation failed and
- returning the `validated` value tells TypeScript more about the type of that property especially if have not explicitly provided the input & output interfaces of your schema

> N.B: if the validator does not return a validated value or it is undefined, the direct value passed will be used even `undefined`.

> N.B: if the validator happens to throw an error, the validation of the said property will fail with reason `an error occurred`

## Post validation

If you find the need to perform multiple validation steps on more than one field, you can achieve this with the `postValidate` option of your schema.

### PostValidationConfig:

```ts
type PostValidationConfig = {
  properties: keyof Input[];
  handler: (
    summary: Summary<Input, Output, CtxOptions>,
    propertiesProvided
  ) =>
    | void
    | ValidationResponseObject
    | Promise<void | ValidationResponseObject>;
};

// and the schema postValidate option's signature

type Options = {
  ...otherOptions;
  postValidate: PostValidationConfig | PostValidationConfig[];
};
```

As illustrated in the example above, the PostValidateConfig is an object that expects two properties:

- `properties` an array of at least two unique input properties on your schema
- `handler` a function (sync/async) that will determine the validity of the operation with respect to it's properties. This function is called immediately the initial validation is successful and at least one of the properties of it's config has been provided during updates but always gets called at creation

> **If the postValidate option is an array, every set of properties has to be unique for each config**

```ts
// ❌ this will result in a schema error
const schema = new Schema(definitions, {
  postValidate: [
    { properties: ['email', 'username'], handler },
    { properties: ['email', 'username'], handler }
  ]
});

// ❌ this will also result in a schema error
const schema = new Schema(definitions, {
  postValidate: [
    { properties: ['email', 'username'], handler },
    { properties: ['username', 'email'], handler }
  ]
});

// ✅ this works
const schema = new Schema(definitions, {
  postValidate: [
    { properties: ['email', 'username'], handler },
    { properties: ['role', 'username'], handler }
  ]
});
```

> N.B: **This option is not inherited during schema extension**

> N.B: if the post-validator happens to throw an error, the validation of the provided properties related to this validator will all fail with reason `an error occurred`

## Built-in validation helpers

Here are some built-in validators you could use study to build your own validators:

- [isArrayOk](./isArrayOk.md)
- [isBooleanOk](./isBooleanOk.md)
- [isCreditCardOk](./isCreditCardOk.md)
- [isEmailOk](./isEmailOk.md)
- [isNumberOk](./isNumberOk.md)
- [isStringOk](.isStringOk.md)
