docs/v3.0.0/schema/definition/life-cycles.md, before:

# The Operation Context

This is an object comprized of values of the instance during a life cycle operation ( cloning, creation or update ) plus any side effect values (if present during the operation) defined in your schema.

# Life Cycle listeners

These are functions that are invoked during a life cycle operation and recieve the [operation context](#the-operation-context) as only parameter. They are expected to respect the type below

```ts
type Listener<T> = (ctx: T) => void | Promise<void>;
```

## onDelete

A void function or array of void functions(async / sync) you want to execute every time an instance of your model gets deleted. That is; every time the **`model.delete`** method is invoked. These listeners have access to a context without sideEffects even if passed to the delete method of the model. Default **[ ]**

## onFailure

A void function or array of void functions(async / sync) you want to execute every time the **`create`**, **`clone`** & **`update`** operations are unsuccessful. Default **[ ]**

## onSuccess

A void function or array of void functions(async / sync) you want to execute every time the **`create`**, **`clone`** & **`update`** operations are successful. Listeners for this event should expect the operation's context object & the concerned operation name (`creating` | `updating`) as first & second parameters respectively. Default **[ ]**

As from `v2.5.0`, these listeners have to be triggered manually by invoking the handleSuccess method of the operation's results object returned by the create, clone & update methods of your models.

If the operation is unsuccessful, `handleSuccess` will be `undefined`

```js
const { data, error, handleSuccess } = await UserModel.create(userData);

await handleSuccess?.();
```

Commit message:

doc: updated docs of v3.0.0 with respect to conditionally required properties

docs/v3.0.0/schema/definition/life-cycles.md, after:

# The Operation Context

This is an object comprized of values of the instance during a life cycle operation ( cloning, creation or update ) plus any side effect values (if present during the operation) defined in your schema.

# Life Cycle listeners

These are functions that are invoked during a life cycle operation and recieve the [operation context](#the-operation-context) as only parameter. They are expected to respect the type below

```ts
type Listener<T> = (ctx: T) => void | Promise<void>;
```

## onDelete

A void function or array of void functions(async / sync) you want to execute every time an instance of your model gets deleted. That is; every time the **`model.delete`** method is invoked. These listeners have access to a context without sideEffects even if passed to the delete method of the model. Default **[ ]**

## onFailure

A void function or array of void functions(async / sync) you want to execute every time the **`create`**, **`clone`** & **`update`** operations are unsuccessful. Default **[ ]**

> N.B: They are only allowed on properties that support and have validators

## onSuccess

A void function or array of void functions(async / sync) you want to execute every time the **`create`**, **`clone`** & **`update`** operations are successful. Listeners for this event should expect the operation's context object & the concerned operation name (`creating` | `updating`) as first & second parameters respectively. Default **[ ]**

As from `v2.5.0`, these listeners have to be triggered manually by invoking the handleSuccess method of the operation's results object returned by the create, clone & update methods of your models.

If the operation is unsuccessful, `handleSuccess` will be `undefined`

```js
const { data, error, handleSuccess } = await UserModel.create(userData);

await handleSuccess?.();
```
